FOR REVIEW / STINE-DANK / 2020.05.22

MEETING PROCESSES

Meetings will start on time, end on time. Meetings of Open Voice Network standing committees and technical project committees will begin and conclude promptly at the times scheduled.   If it is deemed important by the committee chair and/or meeting moderator to continue a conversation beyond  the scheduled adjournment time, the chair or moderator will pause the meeting at the scheduled adjournment time, and invite participants to continue.  No decision will be taken by a committee outside the scheduled meeting window. 

Meetings will operate under the antitrust guidelines of The Linux Foundation, found here:  https://www.linuxfoundation.org/antitrust-policy/.  A statement to this effect, along with a slide that shows the URL of the Linux Foundation antitrust guidelines, will be shown at the beginning of every Open Voice Network standing and technical project committee meetings.

Meeting agendas will be distributed to meeting participants no less than 48 hours in advance.  Meeting agendas for the OVN technical committees and project task forces will be posted in the OVN GitHub Docs Repo no than 48 hours in advance of the meeting.    

Meetings will foster accountability and follow-up.  The review of relevant and outstanding issues will be a stated agenda item early on the agenda of every Open Voice Network standing and technical project committee meeting.  All Technical standing committees and project task forces will use GitHub (see below) to document issues for resolution, and relevant and outstanding Github issues will be reviewed in every meeting.

Meetings will be recorded, and notes will be taken.   All scheduled meetings of technical standing and project committees will be recorded, using the recording technology of the web conferencing platform in use.  Full audio-visual meeting recordings will be stored in the Technical Committee Open Voice Network Google Share Drive.   An announcement of “this meeting is being recorded” will be made at the beginning of every meeting.  Notes will be taken on all meetings, published within 48 hours to participants, and stored in the appropriate committee-task force-community document management  tool (most often GitHub or the OVN G Suite Share Drive.)   Notes for Technical standing committee and project task force meetings will be posted in GitHub, and in the appropriate Docs repository. 


WORKING TOOLS

The technical standing and project committees will use the following technologies:

Github (of course) for technical document management and review, at https://github.com/orgs/open-voice-network , with two-factor authentication.    Team members  will be added to the proper OVN Github account upon invitation to the technical standing or project committees, or through a request (providing e-mail address and GitHub handle) to the OVN Executive Director via Slack, or by e-mail (jon.stine@openvoicenetwork.org.)   

Slack for instant messaging and quick issue resolution.   You added to the OVN Slack Channels upon invitation to the OVN Technical Committee, a project task force, or one of the OVN Communities.  To request participation in the OVN Slack Channels, please e-mail the OVN Executive Director (jon.stine@openvoicenetwork.org.) 

Google G Suite (as noted above) for non-technical document management (Calendars, meeting notes, meeting recordings, relevant financial documents.)  Technically-focused committees and project task forces will use GitHub for document management; other OVN Communities and committees (such as Ethical Use, and Health & Life Sciences) will use Google G Suite for document storage and management.  To obtain access, please request access via an e-mail to the OVN Executive Director (jon.stine@openvoicenetwork.org), and include your Google e-mail address (required for access to G Suite.)   
